welcome welcome welcome good morning
everybody
uh good evening uh if you're in canberra
as chris gregory is um
one of our speakers
thank you uh for joining us at this lsc
research seminar on anthropological
theory a series that this term we are
devoting to the works of our late friend
and colleague david graber
i'm alpha shah a professor in the
department here and chair of the series
last week we discussed the book based on
david's doctoral ethnographic research
uh lost people
today we move on to towards an
anthropological theory of value the
false coin of our own dreams
or perhaps we should not call it as
david wanted the false coin of our own
dreams towards an anthropological theory
of value
uh it was first published uh in 2002 by
palgrave in new york
five years before lost people though it
was actually um mainly written
afterwards
to me this book sets the tone and
ambition of what is to follow in david's
later work
and especially the just published dawn
of everything which we started this
series
uh for this
um 2002 book is is really uh david's
first kind of bold attempt to provide a
new theory
of
almost everything uh value in particular
uh and he does so by revisiting classic
anthropological approaches and
ethnographic cases
the book is wedding marks and morse uh
another preoccupation for david taking a
lot of inspiration from uh the late
terence turner david's teacher
it's very wide-ranging magic power
religion structure
history dreams desire everything is
there
and from here it's also clear that
anthropology and politics
by then david was quite involved in the
anti-um corporate globalization movement
that it cannot they cannot be separated
for david
um but i've already said too much about
the book and we could spend an entire
day uh uh on it actually though we have
only the next hour and a bit
we have actually far more qualified and
brilliant uh intellicutters today to
whom i must hand over
so let me introduce them to you
um
so um we'll start with uh chris gregory
who has a very fascinating history as an
economist turned anthropologist in the
1960s he spent nine years studying
business and economics and working for
the australian island steel
and
in 1973 he went to papua new guinea as a
lecturer in economics
and he says he left three years later as
a student of anthropology
his phd followed at cambridge it was in
economics but explored colonial economic
history and economic anthropology of
papua new guinea
the book from this work is gifts and
commodities a landmark book that all the
anthropologists in this room will know
in
1984 he became
he he joined the anu australian national
university department where he is
currently emeritus professor and he's
joining us now from canberra
the year be before he took up this post
that i knew he was actually here in our
department uh that's uh and he was
working uh as a research fellow with the
late alfred gel on an ethnographic study
of the tribal marketing system of buster
in central india
this formed the seeds of his ongoing
research on the rice economy and culture
of busta place that he's kept visiting
over the over the years
in fact uh with a buster-based colleague
he is currently finishing up a
translation and analysis of a
31 000 line oral epic that women sing
during a rice harvest
ritual uh about the birth of lakshmi the
hindu goddess of wealth
uh i should say that also in the in in
20 in the 2010s uh
chris lived for four years in fiji uh he
says as the trailing spouse of the high
commissioner where he used his time to
work on kinship and economy of the
indo-fijian cane farmers and family
firms
chris's publications there are so many
uh include books and articles
all in the general area of political and
economic anthropology um and you know
observing the economy savage money
lakshmi jagger
the quest for good life and precarious
times
in a few to give you a flavor so as you
can see there is no better person except
perhaps our equally accomplished second
speaker today to comment on david's book
on value
so let me turn to don
just to give you a brief introduction to
don and then i'll hand over to chris
um don kalp studied anthropology and
history at nivergan
in the netherlands in anton blocks
department as a student he was very
involved in the squatter movements and
the first
anti-neoliberal stirrings before we i
guess knew that word
and he turned from being an anarchist to
a marxist
because of the influence of dutch
historical sociology and line and
development studies and i think this
transition makes him
his engagement with david particularly
interesting
um don's initial research was on the
failure of the new economic policy in
russia in the 1920s and working-class
rebellions and netherlands in the 1920s
in the shoemaker region
between 1990 and 95 don undertook his
phd in utrecht where he uh continued
uh his historical anthropological work
on dutch working class formation
um work that resulted in a landmark book
called expanding class
um
which he uh you know looking at phillips
and eindhoven transitions from flexible
from fordism to flexible feminism um
wrote about class generation gender
critical junctions before the word
intersectionality was being used
uh accumulation regime so very wide
ranging after this he started working
in poland
with the ford foundation
leading a ford foundation project on the
social costs of
economic transformation in central and
eastern europe
in 2003 he was the first senior hire at
a new department that was set up
at the central european university in
budapest in the new department of
sociology and anthropology and he worked
from there until 2018 supervising more
than 20 phd students
and he it's here that he developed his
interest in the rise of the right in
post-socialist europe alongside his kind
of theoretical ongoing work on critical
globalism anthropology and history
marxist anthropology vernacular politics
between 2014 and 2018 uh he had a very
close affiliation with the max planck
institute and helle chris han it is very
nice to see you here
uh a financialization project and book
on financialization relational
approaches
that they um uh worked on together with
a whole team of researchers
so over the years don has worked in many
collaborative product projects edited
many uh co or co-edited books
end of globalization critical junctions
uh working-class populism in neoliberal
europe a book on urban commoning with
mao milano who will be joining us later
in the series uh as um on the
job session
and the anthropology of class
now since 2018 uh he has been professor
of social anthropology at the university
of bergen and there he's been leading a
project on the front lines of value
so i'm really working on the themes of
today's uh seminar
now um before i hand over to don and
chris i'd also like to add that in 1985
don started focal which is a journal of
global and historical anthropology
which was an effort at close left-wing
collaborations amongst anthropologists
he's still the editor-at-large
and i'm really delighted that he
suggested that we create a special space
on their blog to make these seminars and
the written pieces based on them
available to future generations
so uh we will
and
don and chris uh uh chris tells me his
presentation is 20 minutes and 33
seconds
and dance is 17 minutes
so over to you and then we will um have
a space for comments and questions from
the floor please do start putting them
in the chat if you'd like to uh as we go
along and then matthias kaufman and i
will work together to um to coordinate
the the discussion we'll go until 12 15
and then we'll have an informal space uh
for a little bit later uh for any of
anybody who can who can stay on for for
a while longer okay over to you chris
thank
you you see my screen
yes you're good
okay
good
i confess that the first time i met
david i was deeply unimpressed
it was in 2006 at a conference in harlem
david gave a 50-minute summary of what
was to become his debt book
he covered 5 000 years and 50 minutes
and was this was an era when the grand
narrative was very much out of fashion
his presentation struck me as rambling
and incoherent
i thought he was to use the language of
my colleague who was raised in elephant
and castle a muddle-headed wombat
or if i may use the language of my
australian heritage i thought he was a
artist over the past 15 years
i've come to change my mind about him
completely
i've just published an article where
i've argued that silence and graber
should have been awarded the nobel prize
for economics
for many this is high praise but i can't
be sure that david would agree
he would probably regard it as a
dishonor to be accorded the same status
as the high economic priests of wall
street
when i use the word as a mode
of evaluation i choose my words
carefully
david's contribution to the theory of
value has been to change the terms of
debate
he's taken a word like from the
tea room and brought it into the seminar
room thereby exposing our academic
double standards
here's it too we have spoken one
language in the tea room as in that
paper today was complete and
another in the seminar room where more
polite language is used
as we shall see below david was not the
first academic to realize the
significance of the concept of
for a theory of value
one of the uncomfortable applications
implications of his theory is that
bullshitting is an occupational academic
hazard of the academics craft
we are not lies but we're also capable
of talking nonsense sometimes
david included
my brief today is to discuss his book
towards an anthropological theory of
value not his book on jobs
i shall keep to that brief as best i can
i must say however it was only after
reading his books on anarchism debt
direct action and jobs that i
began to get my head around the central
argument of the hobbies value book
what struck me about all these books was
the extraordinary unity of theme and
content
i see them as a five volume study of the
value question
i'm not saying this is the best way to
interpret what he has done there are
obviously many ways to approach his work
this is just the one i find most useful
by my account that these five volumes
contain half a million words
today i'll be concerned with just three
of these words false coin and
dream
these are the key concepts that david
uses to change the terms of debate about
anthropology
i begin with the latter two as they
appear in the subtitle of his first book
acknowledgements david stanks everyone
at palgrave books except the editor who
made him switch around the title
if we restore the order he wanted the
main title becomes the false coin of our
dreams
the origin of this expression can be
traced back to mouse and herbert in
their general theory of magic but david
gives a metaphor a 21st century twist
as i see it the phrase false point of
our dream is to find a paradox that is a
central organizing metaphor of all five
volumes of his book on value
the question is what does he mean by
this paradox
my short answer is that he's referring
to the political battle over those big
ideas that can change the world
for him the value question is about the
battle over competing images of wealth
the false coin the false coins are the
images of wealth produced by the
dreamers of yesterday the false corners
of an image that has become adulterated
and debased through excessive use over
time
david the old-fashioned dreamer
wants to recoin these debased images as
well to create a new image of what could
be
his dream is not a fantasy it's a real
possibility grounded in economic history
cultural geography and the political
present
david agreement grieber david the
dreamer then is a political activist who
wants to appropriate the false coins of
the ruling of late melt them down and
forge something new
so what is this image of wealth
this vengeance captures the essence of
his approach as i understand it
it shows the car charging bull sculpture
that artist madikiya
secretly installed on wall street in
1989 in the wake of the 1987 black
market black monday stock market crash
in 2017 kristen
isabel installed her sculpture of
fearless girl facing down the charging
bull
but following complaints the feeler
school was relocated to a different part
of wall street
this visual image which gives
meaning to the anthropological notion of
point of view
can be read in a number of ways
i restrict myself to just two here
greta's blah blah blah is a quote from a
strong very popular among the among the
young
the other line goes
the language of this song is not double
dutch even though the elite might think
so given that the composer was a
dutchman
it raises a serious question of what no
more blah blah blah means
what is this message the young are
trying to convey with lyrics of this
kind
enter david graber the bilingual wall
street ethnographer and native
not only has he learnt the language of
the bulls and the bears inside the
offices of wall street he's also learnt
the language of the young protesters on
the streets outside in new york london
and elsewhere
in 2019 he attended the extinction
rebellion in london
he duly recorded what they said and
reported it
the following is my very brief gloss of
how he might translate this question
this expression
no more blah blah blah is a polite way
saying tell us the truth about climate
change stop lying
stop talking
don't give us jobs to do
we too are capable of imagining
different possibilities for life on
earth
if those of you in power don't listen to
our dreams we are all finished
other f words come to mind
the distinction here between the lie and
the bullshitter is a very very important
one which david mentions but doesn't
elaborate
this image another image from a
sculpture helps us see the point
it's one thing for an academic to talk
nonsense in order to impress
but it's another for a politician like
trump who knows the truth and to
deliberately propagate falsehoods
trump is a bull father he produces toxic
firms of the kind that endangers
humanity
bulls can also produce manure which is
to say that the academic bullshitter is
capable of producing something very
useful
we are dealing here with two quite
distinct values
the
ambiguous quality of the academic
bullshitter requires it to be handled
with the greatest of care and respect
david does precisely this in his
writings
let me now move to
david's point of view and his analysis
of the language of those on the other
side of the barricade
the bulls and the bears of wall street
excite the notions and imaginations of
academics as well as sculptures
on the one side we have those from the
schools of business and economics who
crunch the numbers and give advice to
the politicians and shareholders who run
the show
on the other side we have people like
david who occupied the streets and call
for radical change
academics then can be divided into three
categories those who work for wall
street those who work against it and
others interested in different questions
it's a quaint feature of the english
language of those who work for wall
street are called policy advisers or
those who work against it are called
political activists
hence first i shall refer to them both
as political activists
it's obvious then that the schools of
business and economics are full of
political activists while anthropology
has very few
this raises the uncomfortable question
for us non-activists of the political
implications of our inaction
action activists in the schools of
economics and business come in many
different stripes defined by their
approach to the theory of value
neo-smithian neo-ricardian neo-marxist
neo-keynesian neo classical and so on
most belong to the mainstream
neoclassical
school epitomised by the work done by
economists at the chicago school of
economics
a school that has produced 10 nobel
prize winners too short of hubble
harvard the top school
the image of a wealth that informs
the thought of these people i assert is
the false coin of david's dream
the antithesis that defines his thesis
so the question is what does this false
coin of european economic thought look
like
what image of wealth does it excite in
the minds of beholders
here it is in 1895
um alfred noble established the nobel
prize to be awarded to those who
conferred the greatest benefit to
humankind
five prizes are given each year physics
chemistry medicine literature and peace
in 1968 the swedish reserve bank donated
money for a prize in memory of alfred
noble
this award which is administered by the
noble foundation is not a noble prize
however by the operation of the law of
contagious magic it is falsely called
the nobel prize in economics when in
fact his real name is the swedish
reserve bank prize in economic sciences
in memory of alfred noble
noble's descendants are very unhappy
about this state of averse
in 2000 they demanded unsuccessfully
that the noble prize name be dropped
from the swedish bank award because they
said alfred noble was highly skeptical
of economics and as such the existence
of the ward was an insult to his legacy
david graber noble obviously said
certain assumptions about the ability of
economic science to confer wealth and
happiness upon mankind
i feel therefore that while he would
reject the swedish bank prize he would
happily expect except the nobel prize
for speech with peace
as don has correctly noted don kell
david is a political activist in the
ganding tradition rather than the
marxist leninist revolutionary tradition
david has a very interesting discussion
of tokens of value in his value book but
i fault him for not including a
discussion of this token of value
the true coin of the economic scientist
stream the false coin of david's dream
but david it epitomizes an impoverished
and debased euro-centric image of wealth
his whole project has been in search for
a better image of wealth
for inspiration he raided the cabinet of
ethnographic curiosities the historical
archives and of course spoke to the
young
he has no new answers to old questions
his concern is to identify the
constraints that economic history and
culture of geography impose on our
capacity to imagine new possibilities
for life on earth
this enables him to pose new questions
and to change the terms of debate
he has no manifesto no commandments just
difficult questions that get to the root
of the matter
is primarily concerned to excite debate
about issues of pressing importance for
the human condition
if you are looking for simple answers to
these questions you will not find them
in david's work
he is no messiah
he teaches us how to think not what to
think
the theory of value is the most hotly
disputed subject in economics if you ask
an economist to define if you ask 10
economists to find money for example
they will give you ten different answers
however when it comes to the question of
an image of wealth there is remarkable
agreement
this can be found in the image they have
selected for themselves to distinguish
their
their their discipline
the horn of plenty the symbol of
abundance and nourishment found in
european ethnic mythology
all 89 laureates have proudly accepted
this token as a symbol of the true coin
of their dreams
david correctly notes that modern
european thought has its origins in the
secularization of economic theology
this image of the thorn of horn of
plenty which has its origins in greek
myth would not be a better illustration
of his thesis
[Music]
for the for the economic scientists the
horn of plenty punches up images of adam
smith their revered founding and
ancestor whose book an inquiry into the
nature and causes of the wealth of
nations sets the agenda
what students of economics 101 don't
learn is that adam smith had a labour
theory of value
one that excited the thoughts of karl
marx
marx's revised version of smith's labor
theory of value was published in 1867
however around about the same time
william stanley germans and two others
were independently working on a new
theory of value that turned smith's
labor theory of value upside down
this was a marginal utility theory of
the value that provided different
answers to questions about wages prices
and profits
instead of a class-based historically
grounded theory of profit as
exploitation jefferson siri was based on
the figure of an abstract a historical
individual making free court choices in
the market
in kane smith's doctrine of laissez
faire out wendy's labor theory of value
for the economic scientists the labour
theory of value is complete
marx's political economy has inspired
the dreams of lenin mao and others
jevon's economic science has inspired
the dreams of heretics like keynes and
true believers like milton friedman
so at one extreme we have a very
negative smithy and empire inspired
image of wealth
at the other extreme a very positive
smithage
inspired image of wealth the rest as
they say was the history of the 20th
century
david's concern is the quest for a 21st
century image of wealth that puts this
euro-centric image in its place
david's thinking was inspired by the
comparative ethnographic literature
which revealed him the common ground of
the these two different the uh
two strands of myths smithing and
thought
political economy he notes tends to see
work and capitalism societies divided
between two spheres wage labor for which
the paradigm is always factories in
domestic labor household work child care
relegated mainly to women
political economy he notes gives primacy
to abstract time on the labor floor
david wants to turn this upside down and
give primacy to the creative thoughts
and actions of people engage in the
process of reproducing their society and
their children in a culture of their
making
as a contribution to thinking in general
about the value question david's work is
not original
he is careful to acknowledge his debts
to the many anthropologists who inspired
him especially his teachers at chicago
terry turner and nancy munn
he also acknowledges the work of many
others he was critiqued and developed
such as marilyn's turn and indeed myself
over the past two
decades since he wrote his book many
other anthropologists such as hart and
han have developed important new
approaches to economic analysis that put
human beings at the center
what distinguishes david's contribution
it seems to me is that his five-volume
study of value is the most radical and
most ambitious
david's life work which now amounts to
some 15 books by my account
is nothing less than the whole
socio-economic history and cultural
geography of the human condition
it is a study of economic theology of
wealth as as well as the political
economy of wolves
he finds much economic theology in
european political theology and much
economic political economy
and non-european economic theology
his concern
his concern with what our image as well
has become and with the signs of hope of
what it can become
one of davis concerns for example was a
deep cultural history of the
secularization of european economic
theology and the extent to which the
secularization is unfinished business
european political
economy from petty in 1662 to marx since
1867 for example is full of talk about
father labor and mother earth as the
creators of wealth but no mention of god
the son in the form of a weak god named
baby jesus or baby zeus suckling their
mother's milk as in the greek myth
this partial secularization of myth not
only devalued women as mothers it has
also devalued males as sons as a supreme
form of wealth this is a truly great
revolution in human thought i know of no
male centric economic theology from the
non-european world that goes this far
note two that the the um
horn of plenty in the smith
mark's political economy tradition
contains surplus commodities
and that in the economic science we move
from surplus commodities to scarce goods
which we and this of
uh course
precisely this point that silences
reimagines
uh in his with his new myths about the
origin of the original affluent society
this is a line which david develops
so too i find it interesting that the
priestesses in india will hear my work
their myth of wealth and happiness is
pride of case in mother water not mother
earth mother water and daughter rice
their image of poverty and misery to
wife bashing husbands and jealous
co-wires
my time is almost up
if i had another 20 minutes i would show
how an image of wealth is just one
component of any theory of value
it needs to be complemented with
concepts and theories that are
historically specific answers to
historically specific questions
i would then use this general conceptual
framework to interrogate some of the
nitty-gritty arguments in david's book
for me his discussion of the polynesian
gift exchange in chapter
six is one of my favorites because it
historicizes the question of the
obligation to return a gift
[Music]
have revealed the pacific islands have
become the back lane of wall street a
convenient tax haven for the super
wealthy to park their money these super
rich virtual visitors through the
pacific have been welcomed thanks to the
hospitality the polynesian chiefs i've
no doubt that david would accept that
his chapter six needs to be revised in
the light of this new evidence with
these
the
i'd also
note how david's paradox of failure the
fact that jobs have an exchange
value but little or no use value
requires us to formulate smith's famous
water diamond paradox which has set the
whole agenda in
economic theories of failure
finally
i would note that his theory of
as a value
requires a concept of the kicker
alongside that of the academic
bullshitter and the ruling bill farter
the kicker shovels he doesn't
create it
given that david was an incurable
optimist i feel obliged to land on a
hopeful note i detect full signs
first there's a work been done by
investigative journalists on the panama
papers exposing the lies and secrets of
our rules on wall street
second there is a legacy of david's
ideas
he teaches us how to find manure in the
and to put it to good use
third those chick kickers doing
meaningless jobs they want to
do something useful and are taking
action
finally and most importantly
there are the fearless young women like
bretta who are not afraid to speak truth
to power young as always are the hope
for the future they should be the
supreme value in any new revised horn of
plenty
can you hear that
something's going on
sorry
nope
we can't hear it
okay there we are that's what i want
well that's my last slide the struggle
continues the fool of skull has been
removed and reimagined she's now a young
girl
promoting female equality in the
boardroom so
there's still work to be done thank you
wow wow that was super so fine uh a
reading and you've provided us with a
way to
uh yeah understand and think with david
thank you so much for that brilliant
presentation uh over to don don kal
you hear me you see me
you're good good
very good well mine mine is much more
boring than than chris is it's it's also
shorter fortunately
um
all right so the title is constituent
imagination
versus the law of value
the last two decades in anthropology
would have been dramatically less
exciting without david
given david's prominent association with
occupy with the western left more
generally this is even true for the
western world at large
with the publication of his dead book
also exactly a decade ago skeet heart
once said david became the most famous
anthropologist
general public of power age taking that
long empty seat next to margaret mead
and perhaps levy strauss
with the launch of the society
threatened graphic theory the how
journal and the turn towards open access
publishing david now world famous once
more stirred up anthropology as well as
academia more broadly it's a bit weird
to say this about an anthropologist of
the gift but david literally made
history by attacking established centers
and practices of power and wealth
while some in this series of seminars
knew him well as a diary colleague or a
friend i only ran into david a couple of
times
i felt it was not easy to get to know
him
he seemed a bit so lopsistic drawn into
conversation with himself
sometimes mumbling and laughing
privately about the sudden insights he
seemed to run into while doing so
if he had not been introduced to that
intimate conversation before is what it
was not so easy to enter it i felt he
and i never had time to get to that
point for which i am sorry
i remembered these few moments of mutual
awkwardness while re-reading toward an
anthropological theory of value
its style of writing reminded me of
david's internal conversations and his
moments of private enjoyment the
narrative of this book meanders feels
sometimes elliptic as it does in all his
books
the flow of the argument regularly gets
punctuated jolts of joyful energy seem
to pull the author in multiple
unexpected directions
the possible connections that emerge
from the words that he happened to
choose seem to seduce them all the time
to leave the path and get into the bush
around it
david who celebrates creative freedom is
certainly the ziziac of anthropology
as with zizek things can become very
detailed within a narrative that was
already far from linear
as a reader you me you may feel you are
being unduly slowed down even taken
advantage of but david can also take you
by the hand while making a reckless jump
allowing you for a moment to tower over
a conceptual landscape where most people
would normally be lost and you were
struck by the sudden clarity of
perception
i now imagine that should seemingly
reckless jumps were his moments of
private enjoyment
now my discussion here of an
anthropological theory of value must be
short i believe the bush's site
the book has long chapters on gift
giving societies in indonesia madagascar
and among amer indians some of it very
interesting some of it less compelling
for non-specialists
and i will focus on the landscapes that
emerge during those conceptual jobs that
he makes
this book is not just representative of
his writing style and his country
intuitive rhythm of discovery it also
partly lays out the toolkit of concepts
and perspectives that was going to
dominate slater work as crystal showed
in fact it offers an embryo's full
program of research what is dan davis
theory of value how do marx the most
cohabit in it
how do his very outspoken chicago
teachers marshall silence and terrence
turner figure
and what are its possibilities and blind
spots and this all in a few minutes
david developed his anthropological
theory of value
against the intellectual and political
background of what he calls the bleak
1990s
he's very explicit about it
neoliberal hegemony globalized
capitalism economics is dominant social
imaginary both structuralism and
reduction of politics to creative
consumption identity both in
anthropology and other social
disciplines
structure and history had gone out of
fashion he writes action and agency have
become cynically equated to mere
individual market choices
before 89 bujo had worked out hobbitus
as the connecting concept between
structure and agency
gideon stu had been busy with similar
issues
rayburs swiftly passes him by for the
focus on dominance and games of power
that underlie bridges project
in davis david's eyes another symptom of
the cynicism that he saw around him
for david it seems paradigmatic that
anthropologists deal with people in
relatively egalitarian societies and
with people who desire
desire as a core concept for him to
escape precisely such power gaps
david proposes value as the point where
structure and agency meet
and after an interesting interlude on
roy bashkar and critical realism
and his thinking in terms of forces
tendencies and processes rather than
objects
david emphasizes that his value does
exactly that
setting open-ended dialectical processes
in motion
what is this value and what are the
anthropological traditions that help him
shape it
up the shortest way to answer that
question is to bring in that concept
that's all but foundational for david's
work
constituent imagination
while he borrows that term from italian
autonomous marxism he mentions fiona and
negri he links it to a long
anthropological pedigree that connects
clyde kluckhohn marshall silence stance
turner louis dumont and others all of
whom are discussed in interesting and
original ways
tell value is what people tell
themselves they find important in the
realization of their lives
value is amick idealist and dynamic
this seems initially not very different
from let's say talcott parsons but david
wouldn't be graber if he didn't loudly
refuse the implied structural
functionalism
rapist value doesn't work to solidify
stable social reproduction
on the contrary it feeds the social
imagination both collectively and
individually and is both agonistic and
liberating
in the social processes that sets
emotion people die strive love compete
believe pray moralize statisticize
sacrifice fatigize and what not
value is about making differences
ranking and proportioning
the social structuralism
which uh david of course discusses may
be essential for how our language and
imagination works but david following
his teacher tense turner but droidly
embraces figotsky's generative
structuralism and shifts away the weight
from lung to parole and towards
signifying material action
hence his interest in ethno history and
the telling and remembering of histories
and stories
stories become part of constituent
imagination in action
the practice struggle for individual and
collective autonomous becoming
in the end david concedes that the
foundational notion of value is perhaps
not that different from louis du moy a
student the student of lavish strokes
except for its emphasis on process
action and agency
and while the structure of our social
imagination is certainly a totality
and as such embedded in the
structuration of our societies and
fundamentals for how we teach our
children how we reproduce ourselves
it is clear that there is enough
ambivalence and indeed contradiction
within that totality for david
there are
there are inevitably contradictions
between desires and pragmatic realities
constituent imagination often seems more
the property the desire and the practice
of individuals or groups and moieties
within societies than of societies as a
whole
where's marcel most here david's most
basic theoretical and political
inspiration
moses appears at all levels of david's
approach david spends some very
interesting pages introducing him as the
key thinker for a non-cynical
anthropology and for a humanist left
who famously rejected the bolsheviks for
their recourse to stay there
authoritarianism and bureaucratic dictat
in the book most of course appears as
the quintessential theorist of the gift
and of egalitarian societies which are
for david the self-evident object of
anthropology
david may criticize him for his
romanticism but he fully embraces his
notion of everyday communism as the glue
of all human sociality
then there's also the basic
methodological notion of the total
prestation where the full quality the
core values of all society are reflected
in each and every of its parts
including the imaginations and actions
of its members
david does not discuss it explicitly if
i'm not mistaken but he does seem to
think that moses approach may be too
static for his purposes
the constituent values for which people
once congregated as a distinct group and
created societies may become corrupted
over time and people seek repair
interpretations will differ agonistic
and liberating conflict will ensue
holism for david therefore does not take
away the dialectics on the contrary it
feeds them and are fed by them
in all of this graeber seems to follow
terence turner closely
and indeed in a much later introduction
to a collection of turner's essays david
remarked that he wrote value in order to
make the notoriously complex tax of
turner understandable for a wider public
the failure book was originally intended
as a gift
to turner
maternal was strong on marx indeed
perhaps the most outspoken marxist in
the anthropology of the 1990s
and marx were strong on totality and
dialectics too but of a less idealistic
kind
david in this book sets a ternary and
march into a dynamic conversation with
mohs
how does that work out
a marxist will immediately wonder how
the thirdly idealist concept of value
that graber clearly is onto will connect
with marx's similarly dialectical but
certainly not idealist conceptions of
use exchange and surplus value
raybury is sympathetic to the young marx
who wrote on behalf of the emancipation
of humans from their self-constructed
religious fetishes which he wanted them
to begin to see as the mere products of
their own powers of creative imagination
rather than as the gods that they had to
obey
this indeed corresponds perfectly to
david's own agenda as his long and
interesting discussions of fetishism in
this book show
but the post-1848 marks of capital and
labor receives rather short shrift
david repeatedly complains about that
convoluted language of marxists he does
not like the marxian vocabularies and
prefers for example to talk about
creative powers rather than about labor
a term that hardly appears in this book
on value
marks for david is mainly interesting he
says for his approach to money
and here we find an early announcement
of the coming book on that
he emphasizes that for marx value and
money are not the same
but in the next pages marx's value
disappears and david gets stuck with
money and prices which are of course a
holistic system too
with terrence turner he embraces the
idea that socially necessary labor time
a core element of marx's law of value is
also inevitably a cultural construct but
the marxist discussions about that
concept are not referenced in this book
as they are by turner
nor does david seem aware that this is
value operating behind people's back
rather than first of all their own
constituent value choice
in chicago david was apparently not
exposed to moist pastone
he also does not seem aware of the
energetic value debate small marxist
theories of the 1970s
in particular diane nelson whom turner
had read closely
when we look at a number of pages
dedicated to such discussions in this
book marx's value appears as
intellectually much less compelling than
clue cohen's parsons or dumont's value
socially necessary labor time and
david's handling is then reduced to a
rather static cultural concept for
determining via prices how important we
find particular items of consumption
as compared to other items of
consumption
cars for example in the late 1990s in
the u.s were seven percent of yearly
consumer expenditures
davis example
david's marks now seems to be primarily
about consumption not unlike the way
davis teacher marshall silence look at
capital capitalism in culture and
practical reason
it is also
as if david at once forgets
about his discussion of roy bashkar and
his own declared embrace of forces
tendencies and processes
social socially necessary labor time is
a dynamic dialectical relation between
abstract capital and abstract labor
and indeed also a dynamic dialectical
cultural construct working behind
people's back as they do their work for
capital
it is the basis for marx's law of value
which mark's new well was not a law but
a tendency
labor productivity would systematically
be driven up in the competition among
capitals and in the class struggled with
labor fire mechanization and automation
among others
in the process labor would lose any
sovereignty over its own conditions of
life and social reproduction
it would be forced into ever more
education or face devaluation and
degradation
and the same would be true for cities
regions and states that could not
compete with any globalizing capitalism
and would therefore literally be up for
grabs
david could have used mows as a gift
for a deeper anthropological and
relational twist to marx's rather flat
notion of use value
but marx is never allowed in this book
to play on his own unique strengths in
the end both capital and labor the two
elementary positions whose combination
produces not just use values and
exchange values but in the surplus value
the returns to capital which is nothing
less than the key driver of social
change in the capitalist world
simply disappear
according to david harvey marx's capital
has value on the move but in this book
that sort of value just moves out only
to be rediscovered big time in its later
work in the form of mass and deathness
and jobs
constituent imagination is david's core
concept
it was a concept that came from italian
marxist postoperative authors who were
impressed by labour's refusal in italy
to work for capital uh in italy of the
70s and 80s after they had lost a series
of violent confrontations
young workers now preferred to seek the
creation of autonomous worlds of life
and labor outside the wage nexus
this is shortly mentioned by greybury
and he imagines like james scott that
his
egalitarian groups similarly
refused to further engage with
hierarchical power centers and moved out
to constitute their own desired
societies inspired by constituent
egalitarian imagination
however italian marxists such as antonio
negri always kept the development of
capital and the state
in dynamic tension with the autonomous
desires of his multitudes
in graebert's value book they and that
dynamic tension disappear
david's egalitarians are on their own
engaging in a similar constitutive media
praxis that martial silence has been
criticized for
see also johnny perry's discussion
a week ago
of lost people for a similar
disappearance of the imf and therefore
of global capital in david's analysis of
recent malagasy histories they are so
are generous
david in this book firmly dismisses a
patterized regime's value notion for his
new liberal fixation for a paterised
neo-liberal fixation on consumption
pedorai recently returned the compliment
by claiming that davidson's apology was
an entirely traditional one
i think that david did a fantastic job
in giving 21st century anthropology a
new pride in focusing on egalitarian
desires and popular values of autonomy
in rejection of the rule of capital
but the pedorai is right in one way the
values david and visions are amick
singular particular idealist and deeply
place-based the book has no references
to eric wolf immanuel wallistein or
anyone else dealing with space a
multiscalar dynamic analysis of the
dialectical value processes associated
with globalized capital and the ensuing
popular struggles and desires
there's no political economy at all
except of the journalistic kind
david later massively massively improved
on that lack with that book which also
brought long-run and deep global
histories back into anthropology
but while that book is prepared in this
text via david's interest in marks and
money it is not yet conceptually or
methodologically anticipated and i
wonder how david later looked back on
this very traditional anthropological
theory of value he develops here
david was a magnificent and creative
utopian and moralist who was uniquely in
tune with the resistant western mood of
the times from the altar globalists to
occupy
including in his embrace of the
small-scale utopistic mass refusals and
moral outcries that we have seen in the
last 20 years
including in the desire for autonomy and
the condemnation of the overall
bleakness of stings
we did not at all anticipate the rise of
the populace right which is also very
much about value and values and must
also be understood from within the
failures of the earlier left
mobilizations of which david and many of
us were apart
and in the excitement of retrieving some
pride for the discipline
in value we also seem to have forgotten
some of the earlier advances in the
anthropology of complex societies and of
world society including some marxist
ones which are precisely about value
thank you so much don
very much in the spirit of the
friday anthropological seminar series uh
and also the series that we wanted to
set up for david
a tribute to david which is a true
critical engagement with his work and
and i guess in the spirit of that we we
need to open up
for questions you can use the raise
hand function
which is on the bottom of your screen to
ask
if you would like to
say
to intervene it can be a comment or a
question
uh so so i can't see everybody on my
screen so i would please uh patrick
forman i can see you putting your hand
up but if if others could use the raised
hand function on the screen itself that
would be very helpful because i can't
see everybody on the screen at one go
um
i i i i i would love to engage don and
chris together in conversation actually
i'd love a response from chris on
on don's critique um
uh uh and his reflections on what don
has said has said especially in light of
um you know the little girl at the end
of your presentation chris
and the fact that she had to be moved
right she was moved
um and she becomes incorporated into the
boardroom
so what is our message how do we take
david forward what is our message to the
young people
in this room and beyond you know how uh
you know what do we take from david
the possibilities that are offered
different ways of imagining the world
while at the same time you know
incorporating some of the
um uh issues that uh don highlights um
so uh it would be great chris to hear a
response from you you don't have to have
to respond at this very minute but it
would be great to hear from you
um i will i will i will let um patrick
patrick foreman um
you had raised your hand
would you like to unmute yourself
i can't see you on the screen um
there's a question there from on the
from
mary tracy to everyone
um yes there's a question from you so as
far as
i mean i um
clearly um
my
my thinking about the value question
comes from my own history of approaching
the who's you know
being
my issue is looking at the whole notion
of the what i call the image of value as
the
any theory of value presupposes some
sort of image of value and so a um any
value question is at once prescriptive
and and descriptive
and the
um
and
that that image of value there with
master comes in the very first sentence
of his book you know the the
the uh wealth of nations as a forget the
exact quote it goes something like the
wealth of nations the wealth of all
societies is a massive accumulation of
commodities so you have a an image and
so for me as i see what david is doing
and he's saying
they've got this uh political economy
model but the whole
that's the
non-european world and for someone like
myself who spent uh a long in fact i
remember when i first got into marx i
was uh it was a great liberation to move
from
studying
neoclassical economics which is
boring that's probably the worst thing
you can say for it and then it was
incredibly liberating when i was in
papua new guinea to read to read marx
but it struck me that uh when i looked
around papua new guinea there were no
industrial factories not many people
working and it's a very um
and so this is when i got interested in
anthropology and some of the wonderful
work that was coming out there by people
like marilyn strathern she some of her
best work
is called no money on our skins about
harbin margarets and thought moresby no
one reads that but it's an absolutely
magnificent thing and it really gets you
thinking about what's going on
so
for me having been brought up in a heavy
theory the
for me i struck the the ethnography was
just absolutely wonderful in terms of
um expanding our imagination and nathan
has to see radically different ways of
doing things
and so
um
so then
in fact
my image of wealth was in gifts and
commodities but and on that score it's
um
it's really
uh
wonderful to be critiqued by david
because
he is a person who takes other people's
ideas very seriously and is extremely
generous and not only that but he
he can
move you on and your understanding i
think as an academic
three things can happen you get ignored
which is the worst possible thing
you get
this
or
when to get
critiqued by david is it's very
enlightening
then the um
you know and david makes that point and
marx is for
understanding his conception of value is
it's the sense in which marx was brought
up i mean he's in terms of the history
of thought he's quite conservative in
that sense that from pity up until
smith up until marx you know that was
the orthodox
tradition the labour theory of value
there for four generations and the
revolution or counter-revolution have a
way you'll see it i see it as a
counter-revolution
clearly marx developed
smith was engaged in a commercial
economy then marx takes us to an
industrial capitalist economy
but there's lots of other forms of value
in the world outside of that which is
precisely what david is trying to do
so for me then it's the um
david's critique of a lot of this value
was really
a classic
traditional anthropological critique
let's look at this uh geography and how
do we transcend that so um so
yes so
no one's going to deny that the marxist
theory of the commodity is an important
thing but it's only part of the story
and indeed
there's
you know the the
and then so the issue for me then is
and i'll sprint through the issue for
david is you know
what and in the issue for all great
revolutionary thinkers at the time smith
was a revolutionary thinker
in terms of
laissez faire marx's revolutionary
thinker at his time but we're now at the
beginning of the 21st century with his
massive climate change problem which uh
and greta is speaking truth to power
there and we've got totally reconsider
how we think about value and our place
on earth
that would be my
little rave thanks chris thank you um
we've got a very good question from
rachel smith in the chat um
rachel smith do you want to ask your
and mute yourself
rachel smith
sorry i can't see you rachel
but chris and don expand on the step
from false coins to debt it seems
chris ceased continuity and don revision
so don
i'll let her you can have a chat now
maybe you
don't you need to unmute yourself please
he's having trouble the bottom of your
screen
left bottom
[Music]
yeah
okay
um
yeah
so you hear me
yes
yeah rachel thank you very much i think
this is a super interesting question
yeah
that impression has been made
um
i don't think
there's theoretical
in in that book as compared to the value
book but there is methodological
revision
so i mean that book is you know
grand skill
and so the
the
that drives the value book
um
constituent imagination
is twisted into a completely
right and so so what you get is
it's a set of very different visions and
it's got a very different methodologies
of dealing with the
of debt and then you get and
i think
they
indicated that last week very well and
then you get much more structure rather
than than you know
and structural values rather than
histories of value or stories told and
purely amic sort of knowledges
you get much more pattern through
history and so it becomes in a sense
a much more structural book
than anything the value book
and so yes um i think there's a certain
theoretical continuity
um in in in thinking about value and
i've actually criticized the dead book
as a
book about modes of morality without
modes of production it's a bit mean but
it's the same sort of thing as i'm
trying to say here now
but
nevertheless it's much more
structuralist
much more large-scale much more world
history
than anything that is hinted at in the
value book
thanks chris
yes i mean the um
the
i suppose um
the thing for me
in
um
if we see that david's antithesis is the
the real anxiety the ruling
uh smithy and paradigm of wealth i mean
you can see the
you can read the debt book you know what
he one of his primary things is to um
what happens in a lot of economics when
they try to locate their series in a
more um
comparative perspective or a historical
perspective they you know talk nonsense
and really the whole basis of these
of that book is to show that the myth of
bata which informs adam's in fact the
whole theory and all that stage
development you find is simply wrong of
course it's it elaborates out again and
again and that's what's for cindy's
latest book so i mean i think
he's um among other things he's an
economic historian
and a cultural geographer and um
so
you know he's
he is um
he's got a unique rhetorical style
it's not
logic chopping in the marxian style it's
not narrative history and polani style
it's a
sort of meandering
[Music]
you know
a style that she could um it takes a
while to get used to and
it's easy to mistake him sometimes for
being a bundle-headed wombat but
but he uh
he
plays around with things he takes you up
cul-de-sacs and
looks at gets you thinking in new ways
about things so what i see david is
doing he's not a
theorist in that classic sense and
he's he just wants to stir up the pot
and get us thinking in new ways and
expanding our possibilities and i think
he's a visionary you know he's in a
political activist concerned about the
human condition and i think he's um and
he's concerned
about tomorrow
via today in the past and um
and um
so yeah so the um
the debt book will be discussed next
week so i look forward to hearing what
uh i think keith isn't having a chat
next week
yeah that yes that's right keith who's
here with us and maka suarez who's also
here with us today we'll be we'll be
um leading the cinema next week um holly
high has got actually a really um good
question about david's writing holly are
you with us would you be able to unmute
yourself and maybe pose your question
yourself please it'd be lovely to see
you
holly
where's holly what's happening to the
sound
unmute is not allowed
yeah i've got hairs here i think i can
read it for you
thank you but hang on
second christmas move to nominate
is it
new then it would be nice to have her
um
okay
well um sorry um i'm muted thank you
fantastic
they were really great presentations
thank you both of you so i don't really
have a question i was just thinking
about um
writing and i love don's comments about
what it's like to read
uh david graber and um the the phrase
when you were talking um
like it's like adventure writing or
travel travel writing when you're
traveling in ideas and i often find when
i'm reading david's work i i feel like i
get a lot out of it and then afterwards
if somebody says what was that book
about i'm like oh
you know impossible to summarize
cannot say what was in that book but it
was like an adventure just to read it
so i just wondered if either of you
wanted to say anything more about
writing especially chris i was thinking
about because you were talking about
and
kicking and i can't remember what
the other one was um so of course when i
was trying to formulate this question i
was thinking
well some people would just say well
wasn't david just a bullshitter then
because if you know he never you know if
because he's so hard to summarize
exactly what he was saying and it felt
like he was just a meander sometimes
yeah
i i i you know
the point i was making there about the
ambiguity of you know manure
is valuable
and it's a high use value and i i think
you know that distinction he
he introduces that in his book but it's
a very important distinction and for me
the greatest problem now is lying you
know i just find it really uh
trump has raised that to higher levels
and secrecy and this is really a
um
you know
we've got a pandemic of and it's the
politicians who gave that but i think
the um
and that
there's a whole book now written by
harry frankfurt on which is a
really fascinating discussion of the
distinction between lying and uh and
and um and bullshitting which he says is
about trying it's about him trying to be
impressive
and i i think you know
the academic scene is about trying to be
impressive of course because if he's not
impressive you're not going to get a job
and so on so that but there is that that
there's an ambiguity
about and that it can be good
and i think that's what
and what i find amazing about david you
know when i
it took me a long time to
get into the value book because you know
you know the first the first few people
you meet are
nancy munn terry turner and uh meryl
streep three of the most difficult books
in the history of anthropology
but david has this amazing way to go
through and and really
you know you know find the treasures in
those people and uh and in fact
he sort of goes against the grain a lot
of the time
so um
i um
so what was your other anyway that'll
that'll do but i think with the um yes
he's
his writing style is is quite unique and
i've um
i
it's a bit like
um
you know levi strauss in a way you you
wade through all this stuff and you
reach the end and you don't agree with
the conclusion but you learn a hell of a
lot along the way
because of all the new myths and
stuff you've learned so i find with
david he's sort of
it's the journey that's important and
then he'll go up a cul-de-sac and look
around and
check things out and keep moving on
all the time trying to think about
things and to
what i've seen he's trying to do is to
find those are limits to our imagination
what is
what is constraining our imagination
what is constraining our capacity to
think about new possibilities to
organize life and uh and move ahead
yeah i also want to say something now
about writing
am i in the picture
yes sure done
yeah thank you holy daddy thank you
holly for picking this up again and it's
pretty essential um
at some
point in my text
i call it um
[Music]
david's rhythm of discovery
and it's it i think it's interesting
to
to to think a little bit about that so
so
the the sort of yeah the sort of
zijakian
writing for david
is certainly a method of discovery
and um
while perhaps let us say
60 or 70 percent
of the the steps aside that he does
are not that generative
uh
30 certainly is
and and it leads to vision and and to
real discovery and as you know in
anthropology discovery is never just
empirical discovery right it is it is a
combination of conceptual uh and
empirical discovery it's dialectical in
that sense
and so david's writing
is in a sense
very liberal
for the capacity of an anthropologist to
do discoveries and i actually
think
that in anthropological education we do
not talk enough about discovery
and we do not talk enough
about the connection between sort of
liberatory
hijacking the writing
and our skills in actually making
discoveries identifying them
and giving them a name and
david is really grating
thanks thanks don um we have i think
time for one final question
uh and i'm going to call upon edward abs
who's put a really good question in the
chat um edward would you mind
unmuting yourself please
edward
ah okay um uh edward abs is uh at home
in the u.s uh where everyone is sleeping
so it doesn't want to wake them up
that's fair enough um
also i read out edward's question i
wonder um if don could repeat or say
something more about what he says is
left out or ignored in david's book and
ideas about value
that is the marxist idea of value being
created behind people's back surplus
value rather than as people's projection
or objectification as in greybus version
of terry turner's ideas so the question
is can there be a coherent theory of
value that incorporates both notions
uh or as then puts it a dynamic tension
between these two forms of value
so um don over to you for for that
well yeah it's really about that that
core concept of constituent imagination
and a constituent imagination that is
driven by values of autonomy and desires
for autonomy um
it is a great concept it's a mobilizing
concept constituent imagination
and and value how
david projects it in there
but the idea
that just our
pictures of our desires our dreams of
our desires
can lead us to constitute ourselves and
our lives in a sort of fully autonomous
way and of course complete
right we
i mean the whole marxian dialectic of
people being
free to make their lives but not on the
circumstances of their own choosing is
essential now
i don't want to make too much about
socially necessary labor time and all
these necessarily rather technical
marxist concepts but what they all do
is emphasize and give
give a dynamic and a perspective
on that issue of not under circumstances
of our own choosing
now what is traditional about the
failure book and it is and it is not
about that book and the things that come
later what is traditional is that that
david tends to stick entirely with the
natives point of view right it's it's
basically going back to which in
culturalism or any nd to uh to martial
silences meat of praxis well you know i
do mito praxis every day but my world
does not necessarily completely
transform along the lines that i that i
that i projected that i imagined there
that i desired there but then so so it's
that dialectic that needs to be brought
into a vision of value so my values are
important but my values also have
background and yes they are antagonistic
and agonistic and resistant and my
values are not and my desires are not
let's say synchronous with the desires
of the system
but nevertheless i have to struggle with
the system
to realize them there's a perennial
struggle i always talk about everyday
politics we move all the time and we do
and in that we learn about the system
not only about our constituent
imagination so
constituting that imagination is a fight
and a struggle not just with our own
little societies but about the big world
society that globalized capitalism has
created right and so so yeah that is
what i think a theory of value must do
it must be dialectical in that sense of
making our own world but on the
conditions not of our own choosing and
not with the resources that we would
like to have
thank you thank you don um
we will um now i i want to close the
session um
just to say a great thanks to chris and
don chris gregory and don karl for this
very very fine presentations a fine
tribute to david so thank you so much
um i'm sure david will be so so happy
and um we will stay on we will take a
minutes break and for anyone that wants
to hang on informally please uh come
back in in a couple of minutes uh to
speak with chris and don
um there are some excellent questions
that are there in the chat michael
reinsburg has a fantastic question we
can continue the conversation
uh in in the seminars to to come um
keith hart and marcus suarez not next
week which is our reading week but the
week after so the next friday same time
um not
a week a week two weeks from today um
thank you everybody for coming thank you
it's lovely to see you all and thank you
for being with us today to celebrate
david graber